---
title: About the Authors
weight: 14
type: page
---

**Helen Frowe** is Professor of Practical Philosophy and Wallenberg Academy Fellow at Stockholm University, where she directs the Stockholm Centre for the Ethics of War and Peace. Her research focuses on permissible harming, particularly harming in self-defense and war. She is the author of *Defensive Killing* (Oxford, 2014) and *The Ethics of War and Peace: An Introduction* (Routledge, 2011, 2014) and coeditor of *The Oxford Handbook of Ethics of War* (Oxford, 2018) and *How We Fight: Ethics in War* (Oxford, 2014). Her two most recent papers, on duties to rescue and civilian liability, appeared in *Ethics*; her work has also been published in *Philosophical Quarterly, Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy*, *Law and Philosophy*, *Ethics and International Affairs*, and *Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society*, among other journals. She is currently co-investigator (with Derek Matravers) on the AHRC-funded project “Heritage in War.”

**Derek Matravers** is Professor of Philosophy at the Open University and a senior member of Darwin College, Cambridge. He studied for his undergraduate degree at University College London before moving to Cambridge for his PhD. He has held visiting professorships at universities in Canada, New Zealand, and China. His recent work includes *Introducing Philosophy of Art: Eight Case Studies* (Routledge, 2013), *Fiction and Narrative* (Oxford, 2014), and *Empathy* (Polity, 2017). In addition, he is the author of *Art and Emotion* (Oxford, 1998), as well as numerous articles on aesthetics, ethics, and the philosophy of mind. He is the editor, with Paloma Atencia-Linares, of the *British Journal of Aesthetics*. Since 2017 he has, along with Helen Frowe, directed the AHRC-funded project “Heritage in War.”
